Nano PCB Guide [MKC-221] (#190)
arduino/docs-content: content/learn/06.hardware/nano-pcb-guide/nano-pcb-guide.md

- [Nano Carrier PCB template (connectors)](/resources/cad/NanoCarrier_Socket.zip) - an empty carrier template with connectors. This is useful if you want to create a design where you can attach and remove a Nano board easily.

The files can be used together with various PCB design programs, such as [Altium](https://www.altium.com/) and [Eagle](https://www.autodesk.com/products/eagle/free-download) to create your own Nano accessories.

### 3D Files

The design file(s) below can be used for 3D printing, e.g. enclosures, mounts.

- [Nano Board Enclosure (.stl)](/resources/3d/nano-enclosure.stl)
- [Nano Board Enclosure (.stp)](/resources/3d/nano-enclosure.stp)

## Soldering Directly To PCB

All Nano boards can be purchased **without headers attached.** This makes it possible to solder it directly to a custom PCB, using the castellated holes on the board. 

![Castellated holes on a Nano board to the left, solder pads on a PCB to the right.](assets/castellated-pads.png)

This method is useful for more robust applications, where the Nano board needs to be permanently attached.

> ***Do not attempt to solder any Arduino Nano boards using the SMT (Surface Mount Technology) method. Since Arduino boards are shipped without anti-static bags, the board may absorb humidity which will cause issues during the SMT process. Boards should always be soldered manually.***

Reviewer: ```suggestion
***Do not attempt to solder any Arduino Nano boards using the reflow soldering method. Since Arduino boards are shipped without anti-static bags, the board may absorb humidity which will cause issues during the reflow process. Boards should always be soldered manually.***
```

I'm not certain, but I don't think "SMT method" correctly conveys the intended meaning here. Manual soldering a surface mount device would still be considered SMT soldering. So the first part of this paragraph gave me the impression that I am being told not to use the castellated pads at all.

I know what is really intended is that I should not use a reflow oven or hot air gun to solder the Nano board, while of course manual soldering the castellated pads is fine. The third sentence makes it more clear, but since I go into it confused, I might think that sentence is referring to through hole soldering using headers.

Reviewer 2: Hey @per1234 thanks for that suggestion. I was working on addressing some other things, so I included it in another commit.

The 5V pin is also referred to as **"VUSB"**. The purpose of this pin is to provide direct connection between USB connector's VUSB (5V) to headers. This can be used to power devices on a carrier board directly while when using VIN pin this will exhibit a drop due to the series diodes that prevents VIN to back power the USB. In order to connect VUSB/5V pin headers, you will need to solder together the VUSB pads on the bottom of the board, as shown in the image below:

![Solder the VUSB pads.](assets/5V-PIN-VUSB.png)

***If you solder the VUSB pads, and then power the board via USB, it also enables the 5V pin to be used. Be very cautios with this, as you risk damaging your board's ICs.***

### VIN Min/Max

The min/max voltage supply varies between boards. This is important to consider when choosing the battery source, that you do not exceed the limits to damage the board. 

| Nano  | Nano Every | Nano 33 BLE | Nano 33 BLE Sense | Nano 33 IoT | Nano RP2040 Connect |
| ----- | ---------- | ----------- | ----------------- | ----------- | ------------------- |
| 7-12V | 7-18V      | 5-18V       | 5-18V             | 5-18V       | 5-18V               |

### Battery Connection

> The Nano family was not designed to be battery powered, so it has no battery charging circuit, and does not have battery under voltage protections.

Reviewer 2: I can see how to rephrase this better, but essentially, this is in place to inform users that unless there's a battery protection circuit in place, the board will keep draining the battery below the discharge value which will damage it.

> If you want to connect a battery to a Nano, do so by using the VIN pin but you have to keep in mind VIN minimum requirements (which means a single cell battery won't be enough). Since there's no under voltage protection, a battery without a protection circuit will be damaged if it is kept connected to the Nano board even after it is completely discharged. It is thus recommended not to connect a battery directly but rather to use circuits like those in USB pattery packs that provide a stabilized 5V power supply and protect the battery from undervoltage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to connect a battery to a Nano, do so by using the VIN pin but you have to keep in mind VIN minimum requirements (which means a single cell battery won't be enough). Since there's no under voltage protection, a LiPo battery without a protection circuit will be damaged if it is kept connected to the Nano board even after it is completely discharged. It is thus recommended not to connect a battery directly but rather to use circuits like those in USB battery packs that provide a stabilized 5V power supply and protect the battery from undervoltage.
```

- Specify battery type which is damaged by over discharge
- Fix typo

I also am skeptical about whether this warning about over discharge is necessary. I have never encountered a consumer LiPo battery without an integrated BMS. The people using batteries without one will be aware of the fact and the implications.

Reviewer 2: A large number of them would have built in circuits to protect it, but not all. @pnndra what do you say?

### Serial Buses

The Nano Family boards have serial buses attached to the following pins:

| Protocol | Pins                        |
| -------- | --------------------------- |
| UART     | RX,TX                       |
| SPI      | COPI(11), CIPO(12), SCK(13) |
| I²C      | SDA(A4), SCL(A5)            |

The location of these pins are located in the pinout for each board. These are found in the **Resources Section** product page of each board.

## Nano Form Factor Design Files

### Carrier Template

![Nano carrier template file.](assets/carrier-templates.png)

Below are template files for creating your custom **Printable Circuit Board (PCB)**.

- [Nano Carrier PCB template (solder pads)](/resources/cad/NanoCarrier_SolderPads.zip) - an empty carrier template with solder pads. This is useful if you want to create a design where you solder the Nano directly on top of the PCB.
- [Nano Carrier PCB template (connectors)](/resources/cad/NanoCarrier_Socket.zip) - an empty carrier template with connectors. This is useful if you want to create a design where you can attach and remove a Nano board easily.

> The files can be used together with various PCB design programs, such as [Altium](https://www.altium.com/) and [Eagle](https://www.autodesk.com/products/eagle/free-download) to create your own Nano accessories.

Reviewer: Is the claim about EAGLE correct? My research indicates that these files can only be opened by Altium software.

Reviewer 2: Uncertain at this point. We are planning to test this with altium, kicad and eagle. If it is not compatible, that statement will be removed, or alternatively, files compatible with kicad and eagle can be produced.
